---
layout: post
title: Youngblood Photonics Lab wins an NSF grant to explore 2D PCMs
sub-title: 
image: /img/NSF_Logo.png
tags: [electro-optic memory, phase-change photonics, 2D materials]
comments: false
---

Our proposal on "Elucidating Structural Transformations in MoTe<sub>2</sub> for Efficient Optoelectronic Memory" in collaboration with Feng Xiong from Pitt was funded! We are excited to better understand the mechanism for phase transition in the 2D material MoTe<sub>2</sub> using optical and electrical techinques. See the following technical abstract for more information:

Phase-change materials that enable optoelectronic memory have the potential to transform low-energy, non-von Neumann computing architectures by processing information in memory at the speed of light. A phase-change material that is atomically flat (e.g. MoTe<sub>2</sub> and its alloy Mo<sub>1-x</sub>W<sub>x</sub>Te<sub>2</sub>) would further reduce the energy required to configure its state by drastically reducing the active volume undergoing a phase transition. While optically induced phase transformations have been observed in MoTe<sub>2</sub> and related materials, these transformations have been irreversible unlike similar observations employing electrochemical doping and mechanical strain. Limited empirical evidence and theoretical modeling indicates Te vacancies play a central role in the phase transition process, but a clear understanding of the dynamics and physical mechanism of optical switching between the 2H and 1T' phases in MoTe<sub>2</sub> remains elusive to date. The team proposes that optically induced structural transformations can be controlled in MoTe<sub>2</sub> through material synthesis, encapsulation, and W-alloying, resulting in higher operating speeds, improved reliability, and lower switching energies. To test this hypothesis, the project contains the following three aims: 

(1) determine the influence of Te vacancies on the optical switching power by engineering the concentration of Te vacancies during the MoTe<sub>2</sub> growth process;
 
(2) encapsulate MoTe<sub>2</sub> to reduce Te loss during optical excitation?the expected mechanism preventing reversible optical switching; and 

(3) alloy MoTe<sub>2</sub> with W to engineer an optimal 2D material for efficient and rewriteable optoelectronic phase-change memory. 

The proposed approach overcomes the temporal limitations of prior experimental techniques by probing the phase-transition process in the optical domain. The proposed research is expected to enable the development of high-speed, non-volatile, and efficient data storage by exploiting structural transformations in MoTe<sub>2</sub> to encode information. This study is the first to use a combination of optical and electro-optical techniques to resolve conflicting theoretical models regarding the phase transformation mechanisms, dynamics, and optimal stoichiometry of MoTe<sub>2</sub> and its alloy Mo<sub>1-x</sub>W<sub>x</sub>Te<sub>2</sub>. New insights into phase-transformation process of MoTe<sub>2</sub> are expected to have broad application to fields beyond data storage, such as neuromorphic computing, electro-optic conversion, flexible electronics, and reconfigurable topological and quantum devices.


Link to NSF funding page [here](https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2003325).